<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>


<section
    xmlns="http://docbook.org/ns/docbook" version="5.0"
    xmlns:xi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XInclude"
    >

  <title>Pire: Source code and Installation</title>


  <para>
    While Pire could exist separately from Pi-forall (or at least rely on
    only parts of it), it was convenient to have all of Pi-forall's source
    code at hand.
  </para>

  <para>
    The source code is therefore a complete copy of Pi-forall's source
    code from the solutions directory of Stephanie's OPLSS14
    code, with Pire's modules added, all starting with
    <classname>Re</classname> (for
    "refactoring").<footnote>
    <para>
      Pire's cabal file <filename>pire.cabal</filename> 
      started out as Pi-forall's cabal file as well,
      with some additional requirements (for Trifecta etc) added.
    </para>
  </footnote>

  </para>

  <para>
    Installation works for me in a cabal sandbox on a Debian jessie (= testing)
    system, ie. with ghc 7.6.3 currently, and relying heavily on quite some
    additional Haskell packages, installed not via cabal, but as Debian packages.
  </para>

  <para>
    I find the Debian Haskell packages well maintained and easy to
    install, and enjoy the comfort of getting updates automatically once
    in a while, and am willing therefore to at times sacrifice having the
    newest version from hackage. This is reflected in the relatively
    relaxed version bounds of the packages required, eg. requiring
    trifecta to be just just >= 1.4.3, would make Debian's version still
    acceptable, even though there is a newer version: 1.5.1 already
    available on hackage. - I have
    relaxed the upper bounds for Pi-forall's original requirements as well:
    not sure if it was wise to do so, but will see.
  </para>

    
  <para>
    Steps to install (roughly):
  </para>

   <programlisting><![CDATA[$ cd pire
$ cabal sandbox init
$ cabal update
$ cabal install highlight-versions
$ cabal --dry-run install | ./.cabal-sandbox/bin/highlight-versions]]></programlisting>

    
  <para>
    ...and if happy with this dry-run, do the real installation:
  </para>
  
  
  <programlisting><![CDATA[$ cabal install]]></programlisting>

      
  <para>
    You should then be able to experiment with the original Pi-forall
    code, as well as Pire's in <emphasis>cabal-repl</emphasis> 
    (the sandbox aware version
    of ghci), loading the main Pi-forall module e.g.:
  </para>
  
  <programlisting><![CDATA[$ cabal repl
...
> :l Main
]]></programlisting>

        
  <para>
    Or Pire's trifecta parsers:
  </para>

  
  <programlisting><![CDATA[> :l ReParse]]></programlisting>
  
  
  <para>
    I plan to maintain the code 
    in this "easy to install on Debian
    testing" manner, ie. not switch to Trifecta 1.5.1 eg. before
    version 1.5.1 enters Debian testing, unless there is a striking
    reason to use this newer version from hackage today already. The
    (zero length) files in the install directory I use merely as a
    reminder, which packages I installed from debian (<filename>deb-*</filename>),
    which via haskell cabal (<filename>hs-*</filename>, cf. the readme there
    for further explanations).
  </para>
  
  <para>
    Pire has succussfully been installed on a Mac as well, and 
    I would think that there are packages available on other systems similar
    to the Debian ones, and requirements, version numbers, bounds
    etc. should get some more tweaking in the future.
  </para>
  

</section>


<!-- Local Variables: -->
<!-- mode:nxml -->
<!-- End: -->
