<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>

<section
    xmlns="http://docbook.org/ns/docbook" version="5.0"
    xmlns:xi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XInclude"
    >

  <title>The Trifecta parsers: a tour</title>


  <para>
    Load the parser module <classname>ReParse</classname> to start some experiments:
  </para>


  <programlisting><![CDATA[reuleaux@softland ~/etc/pire $ cabal repl
Preprocessing library pire-0.1...
GHCi, version 7.6.3: http://www.haskell.org/ghc/  :? for help
Loading package ghc-prim ... linking ... done.
Loading package integer-gmp ... linking ... done.
...
Loading package HUnit-1.2.5.2 ... linking ... done.
[1 of 9] Compiling LayoutToken      ( src/LayoutToken.hs, interpreted )
[2 of 9] Compiling Syntax           ( src/Syntax.hs, interpreted )
[3 of 9] Compiling Parser           ( src/Parser.hs, interpreted )
[4 of 9] Compiling PrettyPrint      ( src/PrettyPrint.hs, interpreted )
[5 of 9] Compiling Environment      ( src/Environment.hs, interpreted )
[6 of 9] Compiling Equal            ( src/Equal.hs, interpreted )
[7 of 9] Compiling TypeCheck        ( src/TypeCheck.hs, interpreted )
[8 of 9] Compiling Modules          ( src/Modules.hs, interpreted )
[9 of 9] Compiling Main             ( src/Main.hs, interpreted )
Ok, modules loaded: Syntax, Parser, TypeCheck, Main, LayoutToken, Environment, PrettyPrint, Equal, Modules.
*Syntax > :l ReParse
[1 of 5] Compiling Syntax           ( src/Syntax.hs, interpreted )
[2 of 5] Compiling PrettyPrint      ( src/PrettyPrint.hs, interpreted )
[3 of 5] Compiling ReSyntax         ( src/ReSyntax.hs, interpreted )
[4 of 5] Compiling RePP             ( src/RePP.hs, interpreted )
[5 of 5] Compiling ReParse          ( src/ReParse.hs, interpreted )
Ok, modules loaded: Syntax, PrettyPrint, ReParse, ReSyntax, RePP.
*ReParse >]]></programlisting>


  <para>
    Parse an identifier:
  </para>


  <programlisting><![CDATA[*ReParse > parseTest (runInnerParser $ runFreshMT $ evalStateT (whiteSpace *> identifier) piInit ) "  wow this rocks"
"wow"]]></programlisting>
  

  
  
  <para>
    Now parse the identifier in the white space aware parser,
    ie. including the whitespace following it
  </para>

  
  <programlisting><![CDATA[*ReParse > parseTest (runInnerParser $ runFreshMT $ evalStateT (whiteSpace *> id') piInit ) "  wow this rocks"
("wow",Ws " ")
*ReParse >]]></programlisting>
  
  
  <para>
    Naming conventions are as follows:
  </para>

  <itemizedlist>
    <listitem>
      <para>
	Parsers for abstract syntax (absy parsers) have names like the
	original parsec ones: <emphasis>identifier</emphasis>,
	<emphasis>variable</emphasis>, <emphasis>reserved</emphasis>,
	<emphasis>expr</emphasis> etc. and they parse the original
	data structures defined in
	<classname>Syntax.hs</classname>. Their code is in most cases
	identical to the Parsec versions.
      </para>
    </listitem>

    <listitem>
      <para>
	Primed versions of those names: <emphasis>identifier'</emphasis>,
	<emphasis>expr'</emphasis> etc. are used for the corresponding concrete syntax
	parsers, but sometimes I have taken the liberty to shortcut /
	simplify those names: <emphasis>id'</emphasis> for
	<emphasis>identifier'</emphasis>, <emphasis>res'</emphasis> for <emphasis>reserved'</emphasis> etc.,
	especially for those parsers that are used very often (the
	building blocks). They parse the white space aware data structures
	in <classname>ReSyntax.hs</classname>
      </para>
    </listitem>

    
    <listitem>
      <para>
	Any other variation of a name, like double primes:
	<emphasis>id''</emphasis> denote helper functions, experimental
	versions etc.
      </para>
    </listitem>

    
  </itemizedlist>


  <para>
    For reading the code it may be easiest to start with the simple parsers
    (below the comment line <literal>-- the real stuff - parsing</literal>
    in <classname>ReParse</classname>) and then
    proceed to the more complicated ones, and later maybe read the Trifecta setup etc
    before that line.
  </para>

  
  <!-- <para> -->
  <!--   It turns out there are so few basic building blocks... -->
  <!-- </para> -->


    
  <para>
    More complicated expressions can be parsed, too:
  </para>
  

  
  <programlisting><![CDATA[*ReParse > parseTest (runInnerParser $ runFreshMT $ evalStateT (whiteSpace *> expr) piInit ) "   \\n . if nat_leq n 0 then 1 else mult n (fac (minus n 1))  "
Pos "<interactive>" (line 0, column 4) (Lam (<(n,{Annot Nothing})> Pos "<interactive>" (line 0, column 9) (If (Pos "<interactive>" (line 0, column 12) (App (App (Var nat_leq) (Var 0@0)) (DCon "Zero" [] (Annot (Just (TCon "Nat" [])))))) (Pos "<interactive>" (line 0, column 29) (DCon "Succ" [Arg Runtime (DCon "Zero" [] (Annot (Just (TCon "Nat" []))))] (Annot (Just (TCon "Nat" []))))) (Pos "<interactive>" (line 0, column 36) (App (App (Var mult) (Var 0@0)) (Paren (Pos "<interactive>" (line 0, column 44) (App (Var fac) (Paren (Pos "<interactive>" (line 0, column 49) (App (App (Var minus) (Var 0@0)) (DCon "Succ" [Arg Runtime (DCon "Zero" [] (Annot (Just (TCon "Nat" []))))] (Annot (Just (TCon "Nat" [])))))))))))) (Annot Nothing))))
parseTest (runInnerParser $ runFreshMT $ evalStateT (whiteSpace *> expr) piInit ) "   \\n . if nat_leq n 0 then 1 else mult n (fac (minus n 1))  "minus n 1))  "
  :: MonadIO m => m ()
*ReParse >]]></programlisting>

    
  <para>
    And the equivalent expression in concrete syntax
    (<emphasis>expr'</emphasis> instead of <emphasis>expr</emphasis>):
  </para>


    
  <programlisting><![CDATA[*ReParse > parseTest (runInnerParser $ runFreshMT $ evalStateT (whiteSpace *> expr') piInit ) "   \\n . if nat_leq n 0 then 1 else mult n (fac (minus n 1))  "
Lam' (Ws "") (<(n,{Annot' Nothing (Ws " ")})> If' (Ws " ") (App' (App' (Var' nat_leq (Ws " ")) (Var' 0@0 (Ws " "))) (DCon' (DCName' "Zero" (Ws " ")) [] (Annot' (Just (TCon' (TCName' "Nat" (Ws "")) [])) (Ws "")))) (Ws " ") (DCon' (DCName' "Succ" (Ws " ")) [Arg' Runtime (DCon' (DCName' "Zero" (Ws "")) [] (Annot' (Just (TCon' (TCName' "Nat" (Ws "")) [])) (Ws "")))] (Annot' (Just (TCon' (TCName' "Nat" (Ws "")) [])) (Ws ""))) (Ws " ") (App' (App' (Var' mult (Ws " ")) (Var' 0@0 (Ws " "))) (Paren' (ParenOpen (Ws "")) (App' (Var' fac (Ws " ")) (Paren' (ParenOpen (Ws "")) (App' (App' (Var' minus (Ws " ")) (Var' 0@0 (Ws " "))) (DCon' (DCName' "Succ" (Ws "")) [Arg' Runtime (DCon' (DCName' "Zero" (Ws "")) [] (Annot' (Just (TCon' (TCName' "Nat" (Ws "")) [])) (Ws "")))] (Annot' (Just (TCon' (TCName' "Nat" (Ws "")) [])) (Ws "")))) (ParenClose (Ws "")))) (ParenClose (Ws "  ")))) (Annot' Nothing (Ws "")))
*ReParse >]]></programlisting>

      
  <para>
    Of course one wants some kind of pretty printing here, but
    <emphasis>parseTest</emphasis> is only so useful here, because it
    does its own job of rendering the result by running in the IO
    monad, as can be seen by its type its type:
  </para>


      
  <programlisting><![CDATA[
  *ReParse > :t parseTest (runInnerParser $ runFreshMT $ evalStateT (whiteSpace *> expr) piInit ) "   \\n . if nat_leq n 0 then 1 else mult n (fac (minus n 1))  "
parseTest (runInnerParser $ runFreshMT $ evalStateT (whiteSpace *> expr) piInit ) "   \\n . if nat_leq n 0 then 1 else mult n (fac (minus n 1))  "
  :: MonadIO m => m ()
  *ReParse >]]></programlisting>

      
  <para>
    Thus one wants to use one of the other Trifecta parsing functions:
    <function>parseString</function>, <function>parseFromFile</function>,
    <function>parseFromFileEx</function>, eg. parse the if-then-else expression
    above with <function>parseString</function> yields a result in a Result type
    <footnote>
      <para>
	note, that we need here as well:
	<itemizedlist>
	  <listitem>
	    <para>
	      <emphasis>piInit</emphasis>,
	      a kind of empty prelude (to keep track of constructer names, help
	      with layout parsing etc.)
	    </para>
	  </listitem>
	  
	  <listitem>
	    <para>
	      <emphasis>top</emphasis>, a means to tell the parser,
	      where we start, at the top ie.
	    </para>
	  </listitem>
	</itemizedlist>
	
	
      </para>
    </footnote>
  </para>
  
  <programlisting><![CDATA[*ReParse > parseString (runInnerParser $ runFreshMT $ evalStateT (whiteSpace *> expr) piInit) top " \\n . if nat_leq n 0 then 1 else mult n (fac (minus n 1))  "
Success (Pos "<interactive>" (line 1, column 2) (Lam (<(n,{Annot Nothing})> Pos "<interactive>" (line 1, column 7) (If (Pos "<interactive>" (line 1, column 10) (App (App (Var nat_leq) (Var 0@0)) (DCon "Zero" [] (Annot (Just (TCon "Nat" [])))))) (Pos "<interactive>" (line 1, column 27) (DCon "Succ" [Arg Runtime (DCon "Zero" [] (Annot (Just (TCon "Nat" []))))] (Annot (Just (TCon "Nat" []))))) (Pos "<interactive>" (line 1, column 34) (App (App (Var mult) (Var 0@0)) (Paren (Pos "<interactive>" (line 1, column 42) (App (Var fac) (Paren (Pos "<interactive>" (line 1, column 47) (App (App (Var minus) (Var 0@0)) (DCon "Succ" [Arg Runtime (DCon "Zero" [] (Annot (Just (TCon "Nat" []))))] (Annot (Just (TCon "Nat" [])))))))))))) (Annot Nothing)))))
*ReParse >]]></programlisting>


        
  <para>
    This result can then be displayed:
  </para>
  
  <programlisting><![CDATA[*ReParse > disp $ fromSuccess $ parseString (runInnerParser $ runFreshMT $ evalStateT (whiteSpace *> expr) piInit) top " \\n . if nat_leq n 0 then 1 else mult n (fac (minus n 1))  "
\n . if nat_leq n 0 then 1 else mult n ((fac ((minus n (1)))))
*ReParse >]]></programlisting>
  
        
  <para>
    So what?, you might say. - See what happens if we parse the same
    expression with some comments in between: First with the expr parser as above:
  </para>
  
  <programlisting><![CDATA[*ReParse > disp $ fromSuccess $ parseString (runInnerParser $ runFreshMT $ evalStateT (whiteSpace *> expr) piInit) top " \\n . if {-foo-} nat_leq n 0 then {-bar-} 1 else mult n (fac (minus n 1))  "
\n . if nat_leq n 0 then 1 else mult n ((fac ((minus n (1)))))
*ReParse >]]></programlisting>

        
  <para>
    The comments are lost - they are comments after all for the absy parser.
    But now parse them with white-space aware parser (<function>expr'</function> instead of
    <function>expr</function>):
  </para>
  
  <programlisting><![CDATA[*ReParse > disp $ fromSuccess $ parseString (runInnerParser $ runFreshMT $ evalStateT (whiteSpace *> expr') piInit) top " \\n . if {-foo-} nat_leq n 0 then {-bar-} 1 else mult n (fac (minus n 1))  "
\n . if {-foo-} nat_leq n 0 then {-bar-} 1 else mult n (fac (minus n 1))   
*ReParse >]]></programlisting>
    
          
  <para>
    See how they are kept!
  </para>

            
  <para>
    OK, lots more stuff to explain, and to do of course, just a rough
    overview at this point:

    <itemizedlist>
      <listitem>
	<para>
	  explain some more advanced usage of the white-space aware
	  parser, that is possible already
	  (some examples can be found in <filename>exampls.hs</filename>,
	  and be used by cut &amp; paste at the cabal repl prompt).
	</para>
      </listitem>
      
      <listitem>
	<para>
	  in particular explain how to parse files with <filename>parseFromFile</filename>,
	  <filename>parseFromFileEx</filename>, thereby sticking to simple
	  cases first (no imports of other modules), but import of other modules
	  is in the works.
	</para>
      </listitem>

      <listitem>
	<para>
	  create some test cases, to be run automatically.
	</para>
      </listitem>

      
      <listitem>
	<para>
	  refine the parsers, improve the situation for module imports
	  and make sure, they work with all the original Pi-forall .pi files.
	</para>
      </listitem>

            
      <listitem>
	<para>
	  get rid of some of the desugaring that happens in the parser
	  currently still (eg. conversion of Nats)
	</para>
      </listitem>
      
      
      
      <listitem>
	<para>
	  implement some kind of forget function: from concrete syntax to
	  abstract syntax, thereby allowing typechecking (which requires
	  abstract syntax).
	</para>
      </listitem>

            
      <listitem>
	<para>
	  explain how layout parsing is handled.
	</para>
      </listitem>
      
      
      <listitem>
	<para>
	  explain, how we have leveraged unbound's substitutions for some
	  simple refactorings (but have a look at other binding libs as well.)
	</para>
      </listitem>

            
      <listitem>
	<para>
	  clean up the code (ie. remove some of my traces of my experimention)
	</para>
      </listitem>
      
      
      
      <listitem>
	<para>
	  Have some fun, and do some refactorings!
	</para>
      </listitem>
      
      
      

      
    </itemizedlist>
    

  </para>
  
  
  
</section>
